@Dmytro:

+ Ready mag page MUST be accessible at all times with table of current performances. Each application must include current AUC, baseline AUC, n-total, Prediction window, inference window, precursor phenotypes, target phenotypes
+ Formalize the parameters of the general model. The objective here is to describe the xCOR model as a tuple: 
$$  M(I,P,C,\rho_h,\tau_h): \mathcal{D} \rightarrow [0,1]  $$
where \\\( I,P,C\\\) are the inference, prediction and confidence windows, \\\( \mathcal{D}\\\) is the dataset, and the mapping is the risk calculation. Lets identify if our applications conform to thsi model, extend it if necessary (in an elegant manner), and maintain a table with all the parameters. **This is the basis of the general xCor paper**
+ Complete pulmonary fibrosis and manic 2 publisher files

@Yi

+ Please finish the DS2 update, with the perturbation and approximate metrization result
+ For the file [Influenza Variation Data](http://34.66.189.202:4567/uploads/Influenza_dict.py) use ds2 to find simialrities between counties. Find clusters of simialr counties and produce a geospatial map for it. 


@Victor

+ Report of Cardiac analysis [vary test/train split to get over baseline]
+ Start terrorism analysis [gcd dataset](https://www.start.umd.edu/data-tools/global-terrorism-database-gtd)
+ Do perturbation anlysis for N1, N3, N7 and augemnet perturbation matrices for all cities

@Lyn

+ Please share definitive results on mubiome analysis. Need to see a google doc with results please


@david

+ report of qnet construction on longitudinal survey
+ PLEASE LEARN SLURM 
+ Schedule midweek meeting

@we

+ will discuss the pandemic 2 paper with @jin
+ Will share draft for midwek meeting

@jin

+ creed analysis to be discussed
+ New task for Time Aware Machine Learning (TAMI). See cartoon

@alice

+ will discuss ML docx

