# Introduction and Motivation

Polarization is currently a topic of intense interest among social scientists, with analysis of congressional affiliation and voting patterns, sociological studies on popular attitudes, and laboratory studies on media influence and attitude change all in search of a better understanding of central mechanisms (Fiorina and Abrams 2008; Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes 2012; Ura and Ellis 2012; Druckman, Peterson, and Slothuus 2013; Großer and Palfrey 2013; Lauderdale 2013; Levendusky 2013; Prior 2013; Leeper 2014; Thomsen 2014; Weinschenk 2014; Mason 2015). Claims regarding polarization, however, often remain frustratingly vague. The problem is not restricted to popular presentations but appears in the technical literature of sociology, economics, and political science as well. Entire articles appear on polarization with little attempt to make it clear what precisely is meant by the term~\cite{bramson2017understanding,bramson2016disambiguation}.

A multitude of polarization measures have been  investigated, along with a number of mechanistic models to explain the emergence of polarized social systems. However,  models are often limited in how much, if any, of real observations may be used in informing the assumed rules of belief shift. Indeed, imitation and the influence of social contacts are assumed as ubiquitous drivers of opinion dynamics, despite the fact that in many of these models opinions tend ultimately tend towards global convergence~\cite{abelson1964mathematical}. Alternatively,  models have bifurcations, tentatively driving all simulated actors to extreme opinions. Inevitable movements either toward a central consensus or to fully polarized extremes are not reflective of actual effects we observe in social systems~\cite{bramson2017understanding,bramson2016disambiguation}.
 
Notwithstanding the ambiguity of definition, it is common wisdom has it that American society is becoming increasingly polarized (Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope 2005; Brownstein 2007; McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 2008; Hetherington and Weiler 2009). There are measurable aspects of political reality that support that common wisdom. In 1980, only 43% of Americans polled said that they thought there were important differences between the parties. The figure is now 74%. In 1976, almost a third thought it did not make a difference who was president. That figure is now cut in half. Between 1969 and 1976, the Nixon and Ford years, the rate at which Republicans voted along party lines was about 65% in both the House and the Senate. The same was true of Democrats. Between 2001 and 2004, under George W. Bush, Republicans voted with their party 90% of the time. Democrats voted with their party 85% of the time (McCarty et al. 2008). It has been argued, however, that a focus on political polarization within the political elite obscures a stable or declining cultural polarization within the broader population. On most issues, public polarization has not increased between groups, regardless of what groups are being compared: the young and the old, men and women, the more and the less educated, different regions of the country, or different religious affiliations. On a number of points, polarization has clearly decreased. Racial integration was once fought vociferously by major portions of the population, but that is certainly not true now. Views on women’s roles in public life were once extremely contentious in ways that are now quite generally recognized as archaic.

Thus, definition of societal polarization, despite the diverse attempts at quantification, needs work.
In this study we develop a fundamentall novel approach to quantifying divergence of opinion, without mapping multi-dimensional opinions to ordinal values. We have the following advatbages:
+ data driven inferrence 
+ no need to identify groups 
+ metric adapts to changing social norms
+ applies to multidimensional opinion space
+ No need to map opinions to ordinal values
+ measures polarization as a canonical distanec between extreme opinion vectors, which changes to reflect the changes in teh cannonoical metric over time



Major families of models for social phenomena that have been appealed to as offering clues to the central mechanisms of polarization: 1) Axelrod’s Cultural Diffusion and Polarization models represent one modeling tradition (Axelrod 1997; Klemm et al. 2005; Flache and Macy 2006a; Centola et al. 2007). 2) The Hegselmann-Krause Bounded Confidence model and Deffuant’s Relative Agreement model define another approach (Deffuant et al. 2002; Hegselmann and Krause 2002; Deffuant 2006). 3) Models in a Structural Balance tradition constitute a third family (Heider 1946; Cartwright and Harary 1956; Harary 1959; Macy et al. 2003; Klemm et al. 2005; Kitts 2006). We extend the analysis to mechanisms for ‘group polarization’ suggested within social psychological theories of selfcategorization (Lord, Ross, and Lepper 1979; Hogg, Turner, and Davidson 1990). Each of the models analyzed purports to capture polarization, but it is clear that both the kinds and the patterns of phenomena they generate vary widely. In the Axelrod models, polarization only occurs strongly when the  characteristics in which cultures can vary are few relative to the number of ways each characteristic can be expressed. It is not clear how we could systematically or objectively enumerate the number of either features or traits for real societies in order to check the plausibility of this claim. As a formal requirement for at least some cases, however, it may not be implausible. For example, one interpretation is that there must be more potential positions to take on each political issue than there are distinct issues on the table. The common reality of familiar forms of social polarization is that of roughly balanced oppositional groups. Polarization of the type that appears in the Axelrod models at equilibrium, in contrast, almost always either a is radically one-sided or b appears as a myriad of tiny groups.

%In an influential series of articles, Hegselmann and Krause develop a ‘bounded confidence’ model of opinion polarization that functions in terms of mutual influence among those within a specific threshold of similarity (Hegselmann and Krause 2002, 2005, 2006). 

The family of "bounded confidence" models draw on a long tradition of belief averaging as a simple representation of the important psychological phenomenon of peer influence (French 1956; DeGroot 1974). But we are aware of virtually no evidence that real polarization occurs ‘from the edges’ as it does in these models or that it crystallizes in virtue of a specific distance from the edges as it does here. Indeed, there is a great body of evidence that the dynamics of developing polarization are quite different. The classic study by Lord et al. (1979) shows groups in laboratory conditions that progressively polarize, increasing the distance between them over time despite balanced bodies of evidence (see also Miller et al. 1993; Kuhn and Lao 1996). Cooper, Kelly, and Weaver claim that “one of the most robust findings in social psychology is that of attitude polarization following discussion with like-minded others” (2001, 267).

In this study we develop a fundamentall novel approach to quantifying divergence of opinion, without mapping multi-dimensional opinions to ordinal values. 

## Polrization in US Society

Common wisdom has it that American society is becoming increasingly polarized (Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope 2005; Brownstein 2007; McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 2008; Hetherington and Weiler 2009). There are measurable aspects of political reality that support that common wisdom. In 1980, only 43% of Americans polled said that they thought there were important differences between the parties. The figure is now 74%. In 1976, almost a third thought it did not make a difference who was president. That figure is now cut in half. Between 1969 and 1976, the Nixon and Ford years, the rate at which Republicans voted along party lines was about 65% in both the House and the Senate. The same was true of Democrats. Between 2001 and 2004, under George W. Bush, Republicans voted with their party 90% of the time. Democrats voted with their party 85% of the time (McCarty et al. 2008). It has been argued, however, that a focus on political polarization within the political elite obscures a stable or declining cultural polarization within the broader population. On most issues, public polarization has not increased between groups, regardless of what groups are being compared: the young and the old, men and women, the more and the less educated, different regions of the country, or different religious affiliations. On a number of points, polarization has clearly decreased. Racial integration was once fought vociferously by major portions of the population, but that is certainly not true now. Views on women’s roles in public life were once extremely contentious in ways that are now quite generally recognized as archaic.

Polarization is currently a topic of intense interest among social scientists, with analysis of congressional affiliation and voting patterns, sociological studies on popular attitudes, and laboratory studies on media influence and attitude change all in search of a better understanding of central mechanisms (Fiorina and Abrams 2008; Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes 2012; Ura and Ellis 2012; Druckman, Peterson, and Slothuus 2013; Großer and Palfrey 2013; Lauderdale 2013; Levendusky 2013; Prior 2013; Leeper 2014; Thomsen 2014; Weinschenk 2014; Mason 2015). Claims regarding polarization, however, often remain frustratingly vague. The problem is not restricted to popular presentations but appears in the technical literature of sociology, economics, and political science as well. Entire articles appear on polarization with little attempt to make it clear what precisely is meant by the term~\cite{bramson2017understanding,bramson2016disambiguation}.


%but as early as 1964 Robert Abelson~\cite{abelson1964mathematical} noted that models in which agents imitate the opinions of others seem to tend inevitably toward central convergence. 
 
 Even simple emergence of bimodility, an often observed  charcateristic of polarized soicial discourse, is difficult to achieve without strong and often unstantiated assumptions. Another extreme effect observed in model simulations is bifurcation, that iteratively drives all actors to extreme , and  inevitable movements either toward a central consensus or to full polarized extremes is not reflective of actual effects we observe in society~\cite{bramson2017understanding,bramson2016disambiguation}. [REF]


%Polarization is a topic of intense interest among social scientists, but there is significant disagreement regarding the character of the phenomenon and little understanding of underlying mechanics. 

