# NIH

## Transformative Research to Address Health Disparities and Advance Health Equity (U01 Clinical Trial Optional)

https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-NR-24-004.html

## Purpose

This funding opportunity supports unusually innovative intervention research which, if successful, would have a major impact on preventing, reducing, or eliminating health disparities and advancing health equity. Interventions addressing research questions that target social determinants of health (SDOH), which include structural factors and conditions of daily life, are required for this initiative (See NIH SDOH conceptualization here https://www.ninr.nih.gov/researchandfunding/nih-sdohrcc#tabs2). SDOH can be addressed alone or in combination with other determinants of health and as part of a single or multilevel intervention approach. Although a formative research phase may be necessary for some projects, an intervention research component is required for each proposed project. Applicants may propose interventions addressing disparities in any health condition, disease, or health behavior that align with the priority research areas of listed NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices.

This initiative invites intervention research focused on transformative research ideas. To be considered transformative, projects should reflect ideas substantially different from traditional concepts and have high potential to lead to major improvements in health through the development, implementation, or dissemination of innovative interventions to address health disparities and health inequities. To accelerate progress in reducing health disparities, this funding opportunity seeks to support interventions that advance or solidify strategies, policies, programs, and environmental changes to address the Nation’s most pressing health challenges. Innovative interventions could take many forms depending on the population of interest and health disparity being addressed. Note that "innovation" can include development and testing of an innovative intervention, new implementation and/or dissemination strategies for evidence-based interventions, and/or creative evaluation of a novel or unusual policy, program, or environmental change to provide insight into their health impacts.

Several key features of this funding opportunity are designed to emphasize that Transformative Research to Address Health Disparities and Advance Health Equity applications are different from conventional, investigator-initiated research applications. These applications focus on the significance of the problem, the novelty of the hypothesis and/or the proposed methodology, and the magnitude of the potential impact rather than on preliminary data or experimental details. No preliminary data are required for applications submitted in response to this funding opportunity, but could be included if available. Applicants should keep the goal of the Transformative Research to Address Health Disparities and Advance Health Equity initiative in mind throughout the process – to develop, implement, disseminate, and/or evaluate innovative interventions and strategies that address health disparities and that seek to advance health equity.

To support the most innovative and impactful research, the NIH recognizes the need to promote a diverse research workforce (see NOT-OD-20-031 for NIH Interest in Diversity). Applications to this award program should reflect the full diversity of potential applicants and applicant institutions. Applications from researchers with diverse backgrounds underrepresented across roles and positions in research, including underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, persons with disabilities, and women are strongly encouraged to apply. Outstanding research is conducted at a broad spectrum of institutions. To support the highest quality research, this funding opportunity encourages applications from the full range of eligible institutions, including those that may serve primarily underrepresented groups, those that may be less research-intensive, and from all domestic geographic locations.

## Background

Despite scientific and technological discoveries that improved the health of the U.S. population overall, racial and ethnic minority populations and other populations marginalized by society continue to bear a disproportionate burden of disease and premature death. The life expectancy at birth for Black/African American and American Indian/Alaska Native populations is 6 and 11 years lower than for the non-Hispanic White population. Across diseases and conditions, these disparities deepen with a large variance attributed to historical injustices and present social inequities that limit the opportunity of communities and populations to live and maintain lives that are health-promoting. These factors are known as SDOH which shape individual, community, and population health across the life span. 


## Research Objectives

Projects are expected to propose exceptionally innovative and transformative activities that are urgently needed to prevent, reduce, or eliminate health disparities and advance health equity. Projects may prospectively test new or adapted interventions (referred to as prospective interventions), evaluate existing or upcoming novel or unusual policy, programmatic, or environmental changes to generate significantly novel insights, or conduct innovative dissemination and implementation research. Research projects must address one or more SDOH as conceptualized by the NIH (https://www.ninr.nih.gov/researchandfunding/nih-sdohrcc#tabs2). SDOH can be addressed alone or in combination with other determinants of health and as part of a single or multilevel intervention approach. Studies should be guided by a conceptual framework identifying hypothesized pathways between the intervention or program and outcome(s). All projects should examine the mechanisms by which the intervention alters health and health disparities.

Projects must include a focus on one or more NIH-designated populations that experience health disparities in the US, which includes racial and ethnic minority populations, people with lower socioeconomic status, underserved rural populations, sexual and gender minority populations, people with disabilities, and any subpopulations that can be characterized by the intersection of two or more of these descriptors. As appropriate, studies are encouraged to explicitly examine whether the intervention mitigates differences in health outcomes between health disparity and non-health disparity populations. Given the heterogeneity within health disparity populations, within-group comparisons of intervention effects that allow for discovery of health risk and resilience factors are also encouraged.

Innovative approaches to identifying, understanding, and developing strategies for overcoming barriers to the adoption, adaptation, integration, scale-up and sustainability of evidence-based interventions, tools, policies, and guidelines are of interest. Projects that focus on elimination of interventions that are ineffective, unproven, low-value, or harmful in advancing health equity are also invited. Implementation research aims should be guided by equity-oriented theoretical models and frameworks. Modeling studies that evaluate the impact of specific interventions and implementation strategies to identify leverage points on costs and prioritizing strategies, particularly across the broad multi-sector nature of SDOH to inform scale up of interventions across communities and contexts, would also be responsive. Research that directly tests the effectiveness of SDOH interventions in narrowing health gaps between health disparity and non-health disparity populations is also strongly encouraged.

**Community Partnerships:** Projects must document or demonstrate throughout the research process meaningful community partnerships to foster the development of feasible and acceptable approaches as well as acceptance, uptake, and sustainability of proposed interventions and strategies. Community partners can include, but are not limited to, those in the housing, transportation, food system, economic development, education, social services, and criminal legal system sectors. Applicants should provide details on the nature and extent of the partnerships by clearly describing the roles of partners and providing evidence of support from partners.

Prospective Interventions to Address SDOH may develop and test the effectiveness of new or adapted interventions in a variety of settings in the U.S., such as neighborhoods, community-based organizations, child welfare and human service settings, workplaces, businesses, stores and restaurants, schools, criminal justice settings, faith-based organizations, public works and facilities, healthcare systems, and recreational settings. Approaches may include group or cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT), stepped wedge RCT, stepped wedge group or cluster RCT, pragmatic RCT, pragmatic trials, adaptive designs (e.g., multiphase optimization strategy [MOST], sequential multiple assignment randomized trials [SMART]), implementation trials (including hybrid effectiveness/implementation designs), and rigorous quasi-experimental designs.

Examples of projects supported in this category include, but are not limited to, studies that develop and evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to improve health or reduce health disparities by:

* Improving community conditions through community revitalization investment projects
* Improving economic stability, such as through increased job opportunities or quality employment
* Improving housing access, quality, or affordability
* Improving education quality
*** Reducing community-level violence, including firearm violence
* Improving the availability or quality of green spaces or recreational spaces
*** Improving community childcare availability together with providing access to parental support groups
* Improving nutritious food availability in the community in addition to providing primary care-based nutritional counseling to individuals


Study Designs: Randomization may not be possible for all intervention studies, e.g., where it is not possible to assign participants to high versus low discrimination conditions or in small sample sizes where cross intervention contamination is likely to occur or be a problem. Alternative rigorous research designs that provide robust evidence of intervention effectiveness include quasi-experimental designs, such as multiple baseline or repeated measures design or interrupted time series design. Also, hybrid effectiveness-implementation designs allow observational investigation of implementation processes while also testing intervention effectiveness. Investigators should justify their research and analytic design selection and provide adequate evidence of their ability to execute a rigorous and appropriate analysis of randomized or non-randomized study data.

### Non-Responsive Applications
The following studies will be considered non-responsive for this announcement:

* Projects that do not address one or more SDOH as conceptualized as structural factors and conditions of daily life
* Projects that intervene solely at the individual/family level and not on SDOH as conceptualized by the NIH
* Intervention projects that do not include a community partnership
* Projects that do not focus on a population at higher risk of morbidity or mortality based on race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, rurality, sexual orientation, and/or ability status
* Projects focusing on populations outside of the United States
* Projects that do not include a Plan for Enhancing Diverse Perspectives
* Construction and major renovations costs are unallowable through this RFA. Applications that propose to use grant funds to support construction or major alteration and renovation projects will be considered non-responsive.
